hello there my name is jay i'm one of
the expert ielts teachers here at
e2language.com
today we're going to look at some
speaking science and we're going to look
more closely at sentence stress
okay more specifically i'm going to
introduce to you what
sentence stress is not stress is in i'm
stressed because i have an exam coming
up
stress is in emphasis okay really
placing emphasis on a specific
word in a sentence and why we do that
we'll find out about that
we're also going to look at the
difference between meaning words and
grammar words this is an important
distinction to understand
i think it's just a good one to have
floating around
in your mind whenever you deal with
language the difference between
meaning words and grammatical words
because there is a difference
and finally we'll do some practice
okay let's do a little task
what i'm going to do is just read you
these one two three four
five sentences the sentences are all
exactly the same
in terms of vocabulary and grammar
except what i'm going to do is i'm going
to place
emphasis on a particular word in the
sentence
to change the meaning slightly okay
and i want you to listen carefully and
see if you can understand and comprehend
the change in meaning that comes from
the sentence stress
here we go john will drive to the cinema
tonight
john will drive to the cinema tonight
isn't that weird so all that happened
there was i
emphasized or placed stress that is i
elongated the word a little bit turned
up the volume
turned up the pitch made it a little bit
louder and
it kind of changed the meaning or it
gave it
additional meaning i should say it gave
it additional meaning for example
when i said john will drive to the
cinema tonight
the emphasis there is the place into
which or the place to which
john is going so maybe he's going to the
cinema
not the library for example okay all of
this of course makes greater sense in a
larger context when you're speaking
okay let's do a little task we'll play a
little game shall we
okay this time what's going to happen is
i'm going to say one of those sentences
and i'm going to place stress on one of
the words
you have to tell me which one a b c d or
e ready john
will drive to the cinema tonight
which one did i emphasize
the answer is b i put
emphasis on the word will let's do it
again
okay which one a b c d or e am i
emphasizing
john will drive to the cinema tonight
okay so we're talking about a split
second here
what i'm doing is on that word cinema so
we're looking at d
i emphasized it just ever so slightly to
change the meaning or to add
additional meaning let's do one more
john will drive to the cinema tonight
did you get it hopefully this time you
got c
with the emphasis being on drive he's
going to drive not walk
he's going to drive to the cinema
tonight okay
cool let's keep going so
one thing that you need to understand is
that english is a
stress-timed language basically there
are two
categories of languages there are stress
timed languages that is
they'll place stress on a particular
word and even
within that word they'll place stress on
a particular syllable
so there's are stress-timed languages
maybe your first language is a stress
time language or maybe it's a syllable
timed language that is there is even
stress
placed on words and syllables which is
very different to english
and if you come from one of these first
languages a syllable times language
then this is really important to
understand because it's going to help
native speakers of english to understand
you when you speak
or if you're taking your exam to get a
higher score
okay so take a look at these sentences
here
they're pretty straightforward but they
grow in complexity
and what happens is we're adding
additional words
and we're making the grammar more
complex
now let's do a little game this time i'm
going to clap
the sentence stress here i'm going to
say
cows eat grass the cows
eat the grass the cows have eaten the
grass
the cows have been eating i can't even
clap that fast
the cows have been eating the grass the
cows might have been eating the grass
so what's happening here is cows eat
grass is
this long it has this much of a duration
right
then when i add in these additional
grammatical words which we're going to
look at in a second
the and the again it maintains the same
duration the cows eat the grass
so i squish in the the cows
so don't say cows eat grass the cows eat
the grass
the cows the grass the cows the grass
whoa and it's very quick but then we can
even add
more complexity to this when i say the
cows have eaten the grass
the cows have have eaten have eaten
the grass the cows have eaten the grass
but i
still am emphasizing particular words
cows and grass
as we'll find out in a second are
meaningful words
so they have more stress and those
little grammatical words like duh
and have start to sort of almost
disappear or they're really
stuck together there let's increase the
complexity yet again
the cows have been eating the grass have
been eating have been eating have been
eating
the cows have been eating the grass whoa
that's very quick
and finally the cows might have been
eating the grass
cows eat grass the cows might have been
try this by yourself you can pause the
video and try to maintain the same
duration
of time that you spend when you say cows
eat grass
and then say the final sentence or build
up through the different sentences
keeping the same amount of duration
crazy stuff
okay so i touched on before the
difference between meaning words and
grammar words and it's important to get
a bit of a grasp
or to understand fully what that means
okay
so let's take a look at meaning words
have a look at this sentence here sleep
is key to good health
now what you'll notice when you look at
these speech
patterns is that meaning words like
sleep
key good and health have quite a
large emphasis and the grammatical words
like
is and two have much smaller
emphasis okay you can also think about
this like
bricks if you're building a house right
you put in the bricks but
bricks you need more than just bricks
you need the mortar you need the cement
that the bricks go on so you can think
about the meaning words like the bricks
and the grammatical words like the
cement or the glue
that sticks the bricks together and as
such they're smaller
they're less visible less oral you can't
hear them as well
so what are meaning words technically
well if we look at this sentence sleep
key good and health we have some nouns
and we have an adjective
so nouns things they are meaningful
words
if i say them you see an image in your
mind like table
or man or bicycle etc these things
appear in your mind as images
and also verbs like uh main verbs like
walk or make or drive for example
you can sort of see imagery there of
someone driving or making for example
also negatives like don't and can't
adjectives which are descriptive words
like good
bad high blue whatever these are
descriptions they
also are meaningful and finally adverbs
with the ly ending like quickly or
slowly or painlessly for example
these are also meaningful words
okay so let's do a little activity i'm
going to give you 30 seconds to look at
this paragraph
and identify which of the words are
meaningful
maybe you're not very good at
identifying nouns and verbs and
adjectives etc it doesn't matter
put that aside look at these words and
think to yourself
which of these have meaning which of
them provide me with some sort of
image okay you have 30 seconds
okay let's take a look at the answers
now so getting
enough sleep key good health
studies shown enough sleep
increases risk serious problems
heart disease scientists discovered one
way sleep protects
build up white blood cells heart
there's a few little complexities there
like for example
shown is the participle of show it's
still meaningful
and then we have build up actually the
preposition combines with the verb there
to make a meaningful
verb what's it called a phrasal verb
build up hopefully you
pick those out let's now contrast that
and compare
grammatical words okay so if we look at
our sentence again
sleep is key to good health is and two
is and two don't really form any
imagery in your mind they're sort of
meaningless
but they're very important to stick that
sentence together to stick those words
together
so grammatical words consist of or
include
auxiliary verbs like ears and have or do
prepositions like in on at two four away
from etc
articles and the conjunctions
that stick phrases or sentences together
like
and or though none of these words have
meaning or
imagery associated with them so we can
call them grammatical words
okay let's look at the same paragraph
i'll give you 30 seconds
please find the grammatical words
okay so the grammatical words in this
paragraph are
is to and have that not
the of have that against the of
in the do any of those words sort of
make sense or
meaningful to you probably not in that
case they're grammatical
okay now that we've learned about this
magical stuff let's
put it into practice with some ielts
speaking practice
okay okay so imagine this is a part
three question the examiners just asked
me a deep
philosophical question and i'm going to
answer in about say 20 to 30 seconds a
nice good response
and i'm going to be using a bit of word
stress in each of my sentences
to make the meaning clear right so
what i'm going to do is i'm going to
read this aloud you need to listen
carefully and think about where i'm
placing
the stress okay so the examiner asked me
how can people improve their sleep and i
say well i think a lot of our
sleep problems are caused by technology
i mean we're all kind of
addicted to our phones and this has led
to bad habits like scrolling through
facebook in bed texting friends reading
the news
so one simple thing people can do is
leave their phone in another room did
you hear all the little bits of emphasis
i placed on those key
meaning words those key content words
okay
so i did emphasize these words well i
think a lot
sleep problems cause technology kind
addicted phones
lead bad habits scrolling facebook bed
texting friends reading
news one simple thing people do is leave
phone another room maybe not is there
but all of those words had a certain
emphasis and the grammatical words did
not
okay let's do it again this time i want
you to
follow me okay i want you to sort of
emulate or
mimic the way that i read the paragraph
okay including the pausing and the
sentence stress and the word stress and
the intonation or whatever okay
so listen carefully and you can pause
the video and follow me along
well i think a lot of our sleep problems
are caused by
technology i mean we're all kind of
addicted to our phones and this has led
to bad habits like
scrolling through facebook in bed
texting friends
reading the news so one simple thing
people can do is leave their phone in
another room
okay one thing that might help you here
is if you
visualize your speech and if you want to
visualize your speech
you can use this cool website here and
you record yourself
speaking and hopefully what it will show
is quite a lot of variation
in the speech patterns some spikes will
be big
these will be the meaning words some
spikes will be small these will be the
grammatical words
where you're placing less emphasis that
can be helpful
okay this time let's imagine i'm the
examiner i'm going to ask you this
question and then you're going to read
the paragraph
as if it's your answer so do you think
older or
younger people sleep better please read
away
with correct emphasis
okay how did you go reading that
paragraph hopefully you read it with
some good emphasis on those
meaningful words okay maybe you
emphasize some of these words like hard
say sure definitely seems older people
tend
need less sleep remember reading elderly
people get by a few hours
night contrast very young babies need
lots sleep
teenagers terms who has better quality
sleep think linked stress more age maybe
not the has there but
you see all the other meaningful
stressed words
cool anyway hopefully you found that
helpful and interesting um i think that
this
stuff that we do these words and sounds
that pour out of our mouths
unconsciously is quite magical isn't it
when you think about it in fact we don't
even really think when we speak the
words just appear which is very strange
anyway hopefully you can apply that to
your ielts speaking test if you need
extra help with your ielts speaking come
across to e2language.com you can sign up
for free and join some of our live
classes
and if you do think about upgrading you
can take the mini mock test
you can join the daily live classes take
tutorials get
full access to the platform materials
including all of the methods lessons etc
there's heaps at e2language.com if
you're watching this on youtube click
that subscribe button